W-21165850-OpenTelemetry-DM (#3193)
mulesoft/docs-mule-runtime-3: modules/ROOT/pages/otel-support.adoc

Tracing and logs export configurations apply to all the corresponding Mule runtime applications deployed, with no support for individual application configuration.

RTF, CloudHub, and CloudHub 2.0:

The Mule runtime configuration templates are managed internally and can't be accessed or modified. You must configure exports by setting xref:cloudhub::secure-application-properties.adoc[secure properties] instead.

=== Direct Export for Traces Configuration

Tracing export setup properties include:

[%header%autowidth.spread,cols="a,a,a"]
|===
| Property | Default Value | Description
| `mule.openTelemetry.tracer.exporter.enabled` | `false` | Set to `true` to enable the OpenTelemetry tracing exporter.
| `mule.openTelemetry.tracer.exporter.endpoint` | http://localhost:4317 for GRPC, http://localhost:4318/v1/traces for HTTP | Endpoint where the traces are exported to.
| `mule.openTelemetry.tracer.exporter.type` | `GRPC` | Transport type. Available values: `GRPC`, `HTTP`.
| `mule.openTelemetry.tracer.exporter.headers` | Empty list | Headers included on every export call made to the export endpoint.
|===

> Tracing export tuning properties:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Tracing export tuning properties include:
```

| `mule.openTelemetry.tracer.exporter.batch.queueSize` | 2048 spans | Export queue size. When full, non-fitting spans are dropped, and a WARNING log appears. Example, "Export queue overflow: 1 spans have been dropped. Total spans dropped since the export started: 2".
| `mule.openTelemetry.tracer.exporter.batch.maxSize` | 512 spans | Maximum size of batches exported per span.
|===

=== Direct Export for Logs Configuration

Logging export setup properties include:

[%header%autowidth.spread,cols="a,a,a"]
|===
| Property | Default value | Description
| `mule.openTelemetry.logging.exporter.enabled` | `false` | Set to `true` to enable the OpenTelemetry logging exporter.
| `mule.openTelemetry.logging.exporter.endpoint` | http://localhost:4317 for GRPC, http://localhost:4318/v1/logs for HTTP | Endpoint for exporting logs.
| `mule.openTelemetry.logging.exporter.type` | `GRPC` | Transport type. Available values: `GRPC`, `HTTP`.
| `mule.openTelemetry.logging.exporter.headers` | Empty list | Headers included on every export call made to the export endpoint.
|===

> Logging export tuning properties:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Logging export tuning properties include:
```

| `mule.openTelemetry.logging.exporter.batch.backPressure.strategy` | `BLOCK` | Strategy for handling full export queues. Available values: `BLOCK`, `DROP`.
|===

== Advanced Features

This section describes advanced features that are available for OpenTelemetry support in Mule runtime.

=== Custom Service Name and Namespace

Service attributes identify the source of the telemetry data. Mule runtime supports setting the `service.name` and `service.namespace` properties to custom values:

[%header%autowidth.spread,cols="a,a,a"]
|===
| Property | Default Value | Description
| `mule.openTelemetry.tracer.exporter.resource.service.name` | Artifact ID | Service name used by the exporter for traces.
| `mule.openTelemetry.tracer.exporter.resource.service.namespace` | `mule` | Service namespace used by the exporter for traces.
| `mule.openTelemetry.logging.exporter.resource.service.name` | Artifact ID | Service name used by the exporter for logs.
| `mule.openTelemetry.logging.exporter.resource.service.namespace` | `mule` | Service namespace used by the exporter for logs.
|===

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

=== Direct Export Configuration

Mule runtime ships with predefined configuration templates that allow you to configure both traces and logs.

Standalone and Hybrid Standalone:

You can access and modify the configuration templates as needed. Configuration templates include Java system properties placeholders that you can modify or replace by fixed values if required.
Providing all the configuration values when using Java System properties placeholders isn't necessary. If a system property isn't defined, the default value of the corresponding configuration entry is used instead.
Tracing and logs export configurations apply to all the corresponding Mule runtime applications deployed, with no support for individual application configuration.

RTF, CloudHub, and CloudHub 2.0:

The Mule runtime configuration templates are managed internally and can't be accessed or modified. Configure this deployments using Runtime Manager application properties:

* For Runtime Fabric: Configure exports by setting xref:runtime-fabric::secure-application-properties.adoc[secure application properties] only.

> * CloudHub 1.0 and CloudHub 2.0 support both secure / non-secure xref:cloudhub-2::ch2-manage-props.adoc#add-application-properties-in-runtime-manager[application properties].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Mule runtime configuration templates are managed internally and can't be accessed or modified. Configure these deployments by using Runtime Manager application properties:

* For Runtime Fabric, configure exports by setting xref:runtime-fabric::secure-application-properties.adoc[secure application properties] only.
* For CloudHub and CloudHub 2.0, configure exports by setting both secure and non-secure xref:cloudhub-2::ch2-manage-props.adoc#add-application-properties-in-runtime-manager[application properties].
```

RTF, CloudHub, and CloudHub 2.0:

The Mule runtime configuration templates are managed internally and can't be accessed or modified. Configure these deployments by using Runtime Manager application properties:

* For Runtime Fabric, configure exports by setting xref:runtime-fabric::secure-application-properties.adoc[secure application properties] only.
* For CloudHub and CloudHub 2.0, configure exports by setting both secure and non-secure xref:cloudhub-2::ch2-manage-props.adoc#add-application-properties-in-runtime-manager[application properties].

=== Direct Export for Traces Configuration

Tracing export setup properties include:

[%header%autowidth.spread,cols="a,a,a"]
|===
| Property | Default Value | Description
| `mule.openTelemetry.tracer.exporter.enabled` | `false` | Set to `true` to enable the OpenTelemetry tracing exporter.
| `mule.openTelemetry.tracer.exporter.endpoint` | http://localhost:4317 for GRPC, http://localhost:4318/v1/traces for HTTP | Endpoint where the traces are exported to.
| `mule.openTelemetry.tracer.exporter.type` | `GRPC` | Transport type. Available values: `GRPC`, `HTTP`.

> | `mule.openTelemetry.tracer.exporter.headers` | Empty list | Comma separated list of headers that will be included on every export call made to the export endpoint. Example: `headerName1=headerValue1,headerName2=headerValue2`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `mule.openTelemetry.tracer.exporter.headers` | Empty list | Comma-separated list of headers included in every export call made to the export endpoint. Example: `headerName1=headerValue1,headerName2=headerValue2`.
```

| `mule.openTelemetry.tracer.exporter.backoff.initial` | 1 second | Wait time before the first retry attempt.
| `mule.openTelemetry.tracer.exporter.backoff.maximum` | 5 seconds | Maximum wait time before a retry attempt.
| `mule.openTelemetry.tracer.exporter.backoff.multiplier` | 1.5 | Multiplier applied to the last wait time before a new retry attempt.
| `mule.openTelemetry.tracer.exporter.batch.scheduledDelay` | 5000 milliseconds | Maximum interval between two consecutive exports.
| `mule.openTelemetry.tracer.exporter.batch.queueSize` | 2048 spans | Export queue size. When full, non-fitting spans are dropped, and a WARNING log appears. Example, "Export queue overflow: 1 spans have been dropped. Total spans dropped since the export started: 2".
| `mule.openTelemetry.tracer.exporter.batch.maxSize` | 512 spans | Maximum size of batches exported per span.
|===

Minimal configuration example that will export 50% of the traces to a gRPC OpenTelemetry collector endpoint:

mule.openTelemetry.tracer.exporter.enabled=true
mule.openTelemetry.tracer.exporter.endpoint=https://your-collector.com/api/v1/otlp
mule.openTelemetry.tracer.exporter.sampler.arg=0.5

> Note: The `mule.openTelemetry.tracer.exporter.sampler.arg` represents the percentage of sampling where 0.1 is 10% and 1 is 100%.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Minimal configuration example that exports 50% of the traces to a gRPC OpenTelemetry collector endpoint:

----
mule.openTelemetry.tracer.exporter.enabled=true
mule.openTelemetry.tracer.exporter.endpoint=https://your-collector.com/api/v1/otlp
mule.openTelemetry.tracer.exporter.sampler.arg=0.5
----

[NOTE]
The `mule.openTelemetry.tracer.exporter.sampler.arg` represents the percentage of sampling where 0.1 is 10% and 1 is 100%.
```

=== Direct Export for Logs Configuration

Logging export setup properties include:

[%header%autowidth.spread,cols="a,a,a"]
|===
| Property | Default value | Description
| `mule.openTelemetry.logging.exporter.enabled` | `false` | Set to `true` to enable the OpenTelemetry logging exporter.
| `mule.openTelemetry.logging.exporter.endpoint` | http://localhost:4317 for GRPC, http://localhost:4318/v1/logs for HTTP | Endpoint for exporting logs.
| `mule.openTelemetry.logging.exporter.type` | `GRPC` | Transport type. Available values: `GRPC`, `HTTP`.

> | `mule.openTelemetry.logging.exporter.headers` | Empty list | Comma separated list of headers that will be included on every export call made to the export endpoint. Example: `headerName1=headerValue1,headerName2=headerValue2`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `mule.openTelemetry.logging.exporter.headers` | Empty list | Comma-separated list of headers included in every export call made to the export endpoint. Example: `headerName1=headerValue1,headerName2=headerValue2`.
```

| `mule.openTelemetry.logging.exporter.backoff.multiplier` | 1.5 | Multiplier applied to the last wait time before a new retry attempt.
| `mule.openTelemetry.logging.exporter.batch.scheduledDelay` | 5000 milliseconds | Maximum interval between two consecutive exports.
| `mule.openTelemetry.logging.exporter.batch.queueSize` | 2048 log records | Export queue size. When full, non-fitting log records are dropped, and a WARNING log appears. Example, "Export queue overflow: 1 log records have been dropped. Total dropped log records since the export started: 2".
| `mule.openTelemetry.logging.exporter.batch.maxSize` | 512 log records | Maximum size of batches exported per log record.
| `mule.openTelemetry.logging.exporter.batch.backPressure.strategy` | `BLOCK` | Strategy for handling full export queues. Available values: `BLOCK`, `DROP`.
|===

Minimal configuration example that will the logs to a gRPC OpenTelemetry collector endpoint with Trace Correlation info:

mule.openTelemetry.logging.exporter.enabled=true
mule.openTelemetry.logging.exporter.endpoint=https://your-collector.com/api/v1/otlp
mule.put.trace.id.and.span.id.in.mdc=true

> Note: The `mule.put.trace.id.and.span.id.in.mdc` property will not be needed after GA. It will be automatically set by the Mule runtime when traces are also exported.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Minimal configuration example that sends logs with trace correlation information to a gRPC OpenTelemetry collector endpoint:

----
mule.openTelemetry.logging.exporter.enabled=true
mule.openTelemetry.logging.exporter.endpoint=https://your-collector.com/api/v1/otlp
mule.put.trace.id.and.span.id.in.mdc=true
----

[NOTE]
The `mule.put.trace.id.and.span.id.in.mdc` property won't be needed after GA because Mule runtime sets it automatically when traces are exported.
```

* Observability:

Collectors include multiple built in metrics and health checks.

* Centralize data processing:

A collector can centralize data enrichment and transformation for Mule runtime telemetry and additional non-Mule services.

=== Direct Export Configuration

Mule runtime ships with predefined configuration templates that allow you to configure both traces and logs.

Standalone and Hybrid Standalone:

You can access and modify the configuration templates as needed. Configuration templates include Java system properties placeholders that you can modify or replace by fixed values if required.
Providing all the configuration values when using Java System properties placeholders isn't necessary. If a system property isn't defined, the default value of the corresponding configuration entry is used instead.
Tracing and logs export configurations apply to all the corresponding Mule runtime applications deployed, with no support for individual application configuration.

RTF, CloudHub, and CloudHub 2.0:

The Mule runtime configuration templates are managed internally and can't be accessed or modified. Configure these deployments by using Runtime Manager application properties:

> * For Runtime Fabric, configure exports by setting xref:runtime-fabric::secure-application-properties.adoc[secure application properties] only.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* For Runtime Fabric, configure exports by setting xref:runtime-fabric::protect-app-properties.adoc#protect-property-values-in-runtime-manager[secure application properties] only.
```

> * For Runtime Fabric, configure exports by setting xref:runtime-fabric::protect-app-properties.adoc#protect-property-values-in-runtime-manager[secure application properties] only.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* For Runtime Fabric, configure exports by setting xref:runtime-fabric::protect-app-properties.adoc#protect-property-values-in-runtime-manager[protected application properties] only.
```

| `mule.openTelemetry.logging.exporter.backoff.multiplier` | 1.5 | Multiplier applied to the last wait time before a new retry attempt.
| `mule.openTelemetry.logging.exporter.batch.scheduledDelay` | 5000 milliseconds | Maximum interval between two consecutive exports.
| `mule.openTelemetry.logging.exporter.batch.queueSize` | 2048 log records | Export queue size. When full, non-fitting log records are dropped, and a WARNING log appears. Example, "Export queue overflow: 1 log records have been dropped. Total dropped log records since the export started: 2".
| `mule.openTelemetry.logging.exporter.batch.maxSize` | 512 log records | Maximum size of batches exported per log record.
| `mule.openTelemetry.logging.exporter.batch.backPressure.strategy` | `BLOCK` | Strategy for handling full export queues. Available values: `BLOCK`, `DROP`.
|===

Minimal configuration example that sends logs with trace correlation information to a gRPC OpenTelemetry collector endpoint:

----
mule.openTelemetry.logging.exporter.enabled=true
mule.openTelemetry.logging.exporter.endpoint=https://your-collector.com/api/v1/otlp
mule.put.trace.id.and.span.id.in.mdc=true
----

[NOTE]

> The `mule.put.trace.id.and.span.id.in.mdc` property won't be needed after GA because Mule runtime sets it automatically when traces are exported.

Reviewer: This needs to be modified when GA.

| `http.flavor` | HTTP version
|===

== OpenTelemetry Logs

The Mule runtime implements its logging by leveraging Log4j, where appenders can be configured in order to send logging to different locations: a file, a remote server, etc. Logging levels can also be configured, impacting which log entries will actually be sent.

> The OpenTelemetry logging export is implemented along with Log4J logging. This means that users can configure the OpenTelemetry logs export and Log4J appenders at the same time.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The OpenTelemetry logging export is implemented along with Log4j logging. This means that users can configure the OpenTelemetry logs export and Log4j appenders at the same time.
```

Configuration changes do not affect the Mule runtime instances.

* Observability

Collectors include multiple built in metrics and health checks.

* Centralize data processing

A collector can centralize data enrichment/transformation that is not only meant to be done for the Mule runtime telemetry but also for additional non-Mule service.

=== Direct export configuration

The Mule runtime ships pre-defined configuration templates that allow configuration for both Traces and Logs.

Standalone and Hybrid Standalone:

Users can access and modify the configuration templates as needed. Provided configuration templates include Java system properties placeholders that can be modified or replaced by fixed values if necessary.
Providing all the configuration values when using Java System properties placeholders is not necessary. If a system property is not defined, the default value of the corresponding configuration entry will be used instead.
Tracing and logs export configurations will apply to all the corresponding Mule runtime deployed applications, with no support for individual application configuration.

> RTF, CH1/2:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
RTF, CloudHub / CloudHub 2.0:
```

> The Mule runtime configuration templates are internally managed and cannot be accessed or modified. Users must configure the export by setting secure properties.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The Mule runtime configuration templates are internally managed and cannot be accessed or modified. Users must configure the export by setting [secure properties ](https://docs.mulesoft.com/cloudhub/secure-application-properties).
```
